Add sc-advanced Introduction/review notebook (#584)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: scRNA-seq-advanced/01-reading_filtering_CellRanger.Rmd

---
title: "Reading and filtering scRNA-seq data"
author: Data Lab for ALSF
date: 2022
output:
  html_notebook: 
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
---

## Objectives

This notebook will demonstrate how to:

- Read Cell Ranger data into R
- Filter to cells using `emptyDropsCellRanger()`
- Calculate quality control measures on RNA-seq data
- Remove likely compromised cells with `miQC()`
- Normalize expression data across cells

> - Calculate and plot reduced dimension representations of expression data (PCA, UMAP)

Author: We disagree on this! I like my parenthetical to not break up phrases, if I can manage it.

---

> In this notebook, we will review basic processing for single-cell RNA-seq data, starting with the output from Cell Ranger, and proceeding through filtering, quality control, normalization, and dimension reduction. We will perform these tasks using tools from the [Bioconductor project](https://bioconductor.org), in particular the [`SingleCellExperiment` object](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/SingleCellExperiment.html).

Author: How about even more words?
```suggestion
In this notebook, we will review basic processing for single-cell RNA-seq data, starting with the output from Cell Ranger, and proceeding through filtering, quality control, normalization, and dimension reduction. We will perform these tasks using tools from the [Bioconductor project](https://bioconductor.org), in particular [`SingleCellExperiment` objects](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/SingleCellExperiment.html) and functions that work with those objects.
```

```

## Reading Cell Ranger data

Whether the 10X Cell Ranger  data is in Matrix Exchange format or an HDF5 file, we can use the `read10xCounts()` function from the `DropletUtils` package to read the data into R and create a `SingleCellExperiment` object.

```{r read SCE}
raw_sce <- DropletUtils::read10xCounts(raw_matrix_dir) 
```

Let's look at the contents of the object after reading it in:

```{r view SCE}
raw_sce
```

We can see that this `SingleCellExperiment` (SCE) object contains 36,601 rows, which correspond to the features (genes) that were analyzed, and 734,492 columns, which correspond to the possible barcode tags that were used in the experiment.
Note that not all of these barcode tags will have been used, and many of the features may never have been seen either.
One of our firs steps will be to filter out barcodes that were never seen, or that may have only been seen in a droplet that did not contain a cell (an "empty droplet").

### Cell and feature metadata

In addition to the main `counts` matrix, which you can see listed as an `assay` in the SCE object, there are two other tables of particular interest to start.

> The first is the `rowData` table, which includes the contents of the `features.tsv.gz` file from earlier.

Reviewer: > I don't think we have to be perfectly consistent

I accept this as long as the first time we say it we say "table (also technically known as a slot)" or similar? How does that sound?

> The first is the `rowData` table, which includes the contents of the `features.tsv.gz` file from earlier.

Author: Yep... I probably need to add the SCE object figure.

- the other column is the `Barcode`, which is the sequence that was used to identify each potential droplet for sequencing (and a numeric tag, in this case).

### Filtering empty droplets

Most of the barcodes in any given 10X experiment will not be seen at all, so our first step can be to filter this raw data to only the cells where there is at least one transcript that was counted with that barcode.

To do this, we will use the `colSums()` function to quickly add up all the counts that correspond to each possible barcode, then filter our `raw_sce` down to just those columns.
We will need to extract the `counts` matrix from our SCE object, which we can do using the `counts()` function, conveniently enough.

```{r remove zeros}
# sum columns from counts matrix
barcode_counts <- colSums(counts(raw_sce))

# filter SCE object to only rows with counts > 0
raw_sce <- raw_sce[, which(barcode_counts > 0)]
```

Now we can look at how our SCE object has changed:

```{r zero-removed SCE}
raw_sce
```

Of course, barcodes with zero counts are not the only ones that will not correspond to droplets without cells in them. 

> Even if a cell does not have a cell in it, there will often be spurious reads from RNA sequences that were present in the extracellular solution, whether from the original sample or cells that were disrupted during preparation for single-cell analysis. 

Author: Slight rephrasing, because yes, what I had was not quite what I meant
```suggestion
Even if a droplet does not have a cell in it, there will often be spurious reads from RNA sequences that were present in the extracellular solution, whether from the original sample or cells that were disrupted during preparation for single-cell analysis. 
```

> We can identify these in part by low transcript counts, but we can also be a bit more clever, and look at the transcript counts _from_ the lowest-count droplets to create an expected distribution of transcript counts in droplets that don't contain cells.

Author: Agree on splitting it up, but I try to avoid `actually`, so some small changes.
```suggestion
We could identify these barcodes simply as those with low transcript counts.
Or, we can be a bit more clever!
We can look at the transcript counts _from_ the lowest-count droplets to create an expected distribution of transcripts in droplets that don't contain cells.
```

> Then we can test each cell to determine whether or not its transcript distribution deviates from that expectation.

Author: Correct!
```suggestion
Then we can test each droplet to determine whether or not its transcript distribution deviates from that expectation.
```

If it does, then we have pretty good evidence that there is a cell in there.

This test was first proposed by [Lun _et al._ (2019)](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-019-1662-y) and implemented as `emptyDrops()` in the `DropletUtils` package. 
This method was then adopted, with some modifications, as the default cell filtering method used by Cell Ranger.
Here we will use the `emptyDropsCellRanger()` function to perform the filtering to most closely match the Cell Ranger implementation.

```{r calculate droplet stats}
# create a table of statistics using emptyDropsCellRanger
droplet_df <- DropletUtils::emptyDropsCellRanger(counts(raw_sce))
```

> If we look at this table, we will see that most of the values in it are `NA`, because the low-count cells are used to generate the background distribution, and so do not have individual statistics calculated.

Author: Taking your suggestion and expanding it with your comment.
```suggestion
Most values in this table are `NA`, because individual statistics were not calculated for the low-count droplets that were used to generate the background distribution.
(Most droplets don't have cells, so this makes some sense!)
```

We can look at just the rows without `NA` values by selected the ones where the FDR (which we will use again soon), is not `NA`

```{r look at droplet stats}
# view rows where FDR is not `NA`
droplet_df[!is.na(droplet_df$FDR), ]
```

> You will notice that some cells with high counts also have NA values for many statistics, but in those cases  it is because they are automatically assumed to contain cells, so were not tested. 

Reviewer: This is such a "weird" feature that I tried to make the text a bit more explicit about why is this happening. take it or leave it, or something in between!

```suggestion
You will notice that some cells with high counts also have `NA` values for many statistics.
In those cases, `NA` values are actually present _because_ of the high counts - `emptyDropsCellRanger()` automatically assumed cells were present, so they were also not tested. 
```

Now we can filter our `raw_sce` object _by column_ to only keep the cells with a small FDR: those that are quite unlikely to be empty droplets. 

```{r filter emptydrops}

> cells_to_retain <- which(droplet_df$FDR < 0.01)

Reviewer: Noting here this is why I like threshold variables - some of the DGE code being prepared is using 0.05. We might want to solidify significance, though to be fair this is of course a very different test from differential expression.

Author: Generally, I agree, but as you say, this is very different. We can also have a philosophical discussion about whether FDRs should be set at constant threshold values, but that is for another time.

filtered_sce <- raw_sce[, cells_to_retain]
```

How many cells do we have now? 

```{r filtered summary}
filtered_sce
```

## Additional Quality control

> In addition to filtering out empty droplets, we also will want to filter out real cells that may have been damaged during preparation of the library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to filtering out empty droplets, we also will want to filter out real cells that may have been damaged during library preparation.
```

These will often be characterized by a high proportion of mitochondrial transcripts.

> The idea here is that if a cell ruptures, the cytoplasmic transcripts will leak out, but mitochondrial transcripts, protected by the mitochondrial membrane, will be more protected. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because, if a cell ruptures, the cytoplasmic transcripts will leak out, but mitochondrial transcripts, protected by the mitochondrial membrane, will be more protected.
As a consequence, there is an over-abundance of mitochondrial reads.
```

Our first step then, is create a list of the mitochondrial genes that are present in our dataset.

> 

Reviewer: I'd add an explicit sentence/phrase about how we're using a TSV reference to facilitate this.

```{r get mitochondrial genes}
# read in a table of mitochondrial genes
mito_genes <- readr::read_tsv(mito_file) %>%
  # filter to only the genes that are found in our dataset
  dplyr::filter(gene_id %in% rownames(filtered_sce)) %>%
  # create a vector from the gene_id column
  dplyr::pull(gene_id)
```

### Calculating summary QC statistics 

> We can now use the `scuttle` function `addPerCellQC()` to calculate some statistics based on the counts matrix, which will be added to the `colData` data frame.

Reviewer: `colData` table? slot? data frame? DataFrame?

In addition to calculating statistics like the total read count for each cell and the number of transcripts that are detected, we can also calculate those statistics for defined subsets of genes. 
In this case, we will use our `mito_genes` vector to define a subset called `mito`.
The `mito` name is important in that it is the name that will be expected by a later function.
(We could define more subsets, but for now this one will do.)

```{r per cell QC}
filtered_sce <- scuttle::addPerCellQC(filtered_sce,
                                      subsets = list(mito = mito_genes))
```

Now we can look at the colData to see what was added:

```{r view coldata stats}
head(colData(filtered_sce))
```

We can also plot some of these statistics, here using the `plotMetrics()` function from the `miQC` package to plots the percent of reads that are mitochondrial (the `subsets_mito_percent` column) against the number of unique genes detected (the `detected` column) for each cell.

```{r miQC plotMetrics}
# use miQC::plotMetrics()
miQC::plotMetrics(filtered_sce) + theme_bw()
```

> We can see that there is a range of mitochondrial percentages, and it does also seem that genes with high percentages of mitochondrial cells don't seem to detect very many unique genes.

Reviewer: "high percentages of mitochondrial cells"?

Author: Woof, that sentence is a mess.
```suggestion
We can see that there is a range of mitochondrial percentages, and it does also seem that cells with high percentages of mitochondrial genes don't seem to contain very many unique genes.
```

> One option is to define a cutoff for the mitochondrial percentage above which we call a cell compromised and exclude it from further analysis. 

Reviewer: Add transition here, eg (or something else like this to remind everyone that we are filtering) - 
```suggestion
How do we filter with this information?
One option is to define a cutoff for the mitochondrial percentage above which we call a cell compromised and exclude it from further analysis. 
```

Reviewer: ^ lol I enjoy how the "we" is not a diff.

> However, deciding on that cutoff can be a bit fraught, as the expected percentage of mitochondrial reads can vary depending on the cell type and library preparation methods. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, choosing that cutoff can be a bit fraught, as the expected percentage of mitochondrial reads can vary depending on the cell type and library preparation methods. 
```

A+ for fraught

So it might be nice to have a method to determine that cutoff from the data itself.

### Filtering compromised cells

> Determining mitochondrial cutoffs is exactly what the `miQC` package does ([Hippen _et al._ 2021] (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009290))!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Determining mitochondrial cutoffs is exactly what the `miQC` package does ([Hippen _et al._ 2021](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009290))!
```

In truth, it does something possibly even a bit better: it fits a mixture model to the data that consists of distributions of healthy cells and compromised cells.
Then we can calculate whether each cell is more likely to belong to the healthy or compromised distribution.
We can then exclude the cells that are more likely to be compromised. 

> To use miQC, we first fit a model to the data in our SCE object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use `miQC`, we first fit a model to the data in our SCE object:
```

```{r miQC model}
miqc_model <- miQC::mixtureModel(filtered_sce) 
```

Now we can plot the model results to see how it corresponds to our data.
We should expect to see two fit lines: 
One will correspond the the "healthy" cells and should show little to no relationship between the number of unique genes detected and the mitochondrial percentage.

> By contrast, the line that corresponds to compromised cells will show a negative relationship between the number of unique genes detected and the mitochondrial percentage.

Reviewer: new line and bullets here?
Also, if "healthy" is quoted, I'd quote "compromised" too.

This plot will also show, for each cell, the posterior probability that the cell is derived from the compromised distribution; a higher score indicates that a cell is more likely to be compromised.

It is also critical to note that this model can _and does_ fail at times. 

> Plotting the results as we have done here is not a step to skip. 

Reviewer: A bit more "aggressive"  if you want... 
```suggestion
Do not skip the step plotting the results!
```

Author: I got aggressive in the next sentence, I thought!

**Always look at your data!**

```{r miQC plotModel}
miQC::plotModel(filtered_sce, miqc_model) + theme_bw()
```

We can now filter our data based on the probability compromised as calculated from the model.
But before we do that, we might want to quickly plot to see what would be filtered out with a given cutoff.
The default is to exclude cells that have a posterior probability of 0.75 or greater of being compromised.

```{r miQC plotFiltering}
miQC::plotFiltering(filtered_sce, miqc_model, posterior_cutoff = 0.75)
```

> In this case seems to correspond to a mitochondrial percentage of about 12.5%, but note that this will not always be constant: the cutoff point can vary for different numbers of unique genes.

Reviewer: In this case __________ ? missing word

At this point, we can perform the actual filtering using the `filterCells()` function, giving us a further filtered SCE object.

```{r miQC filtercells}
qcfiltered_sce <- miQC::filterCells(filtered_sce, model = miqc_model)
```

### One more filter: unique genes

While the miQC filtering is pretty good, you may have noticed that it still left some cells that had very low numbers of unique genes. 
While these cells may not be compromised, the information from them is also not likely to be useful, so we will filter those as well. 
For now, we will use a cutoff of 200 unique genes as a minimum. 

```{r unique cutoff}
qcfiltered_sce <- qcfiltered_sce[, which(qcfiltered_sce$detected >= 200)]
```

## Normalization and Dimension Reduction

> Now that we have done our filtering, we can set analyzing the expression counts for the remaining cells. 

Reviewer: eh?
```suggestion
Now that we have done our filtering, we can start analyzing the expression counts for the remaining cells. 
```

The next step at this point is to convert the raw counts into a measure that accounts for differences in sequencing depth between cells, and to convert the distribution of expression values from the skewed distribution we expect to see in raw counts to one that is more normally distributed.

We will do this using functions from the `scran` and `scuttle` packages. 
The procedure we will use here is derived from [Orchestrating Single-Cell Analysis with Bioconductor](http://bioconductor.org/books/3.16/OSCA.basic/normalization.html#normalization-by-deconvolution).

> The idea is to first account for the fact that different cell types may have different expression patterns that could affect the normalization factors we would calculated if we were to use the raw sequencing depth. To account for that, we first do a rough clustering of cells, then use that clustering to calculate the scaling factor (sum factor) for each cell within the cluster.

Reviewer: OSPL. Also this was all a bit tricky for me to read so I've suggested the following, take what you think works! Also note I use only "scaling factor" and not "normalization factor" to avoid hopping back and forth, since the code comments use "scaling" - 

```suggestion
The approach helps account for expression differences among different cell types, which can affect the scaling factors calculated when using the raw sequencing depth. 
To ameliorate problems resulting from differences in sequencing depth, we perform a rough clustering of cells (`scran::quickCluster()`), and then use that clustering to calculate the scaling factor (`scran::computeSumFactors()`) for each cell within its cluster.
```

Finally, we apply the scaling factor and calculate the log-scaled expression values.

```{r normalization}
# Perform rough clustering
qclust <- scran::quickCluster(qcfiltered_sce)

# use clusters to compute scaling factors and add to SCE object
qcfiltered_sce <- scran::computeSumFactors(qcfiltered_sce, clusters = qclust)

# perform normalization using scaling factors
# and save as a new SCE object
normalized_sce <- scuttle::logNormCounts(qcfiltered_sce)
```

> This creates a new "assay" in the `normalized_sce` object, `logcounts`, which contains the normalized count values for each cell and gene.

Reviewer: "Sadly these are not actually the log of the counts, but this term is used for historical reasons." We can include or not, up to you!

```{r normalized sce}
normalized_sce
```

## Dimension Reduction

Now that we have normalized expression values, we would like to produce some reduced-dimension representations of the data.
These will allow us to perform some downstream calculations more quickly, reduce some of the noise in the data, and allow us to visualize overall relationships among cells more easily (though with many caveats!).

### Selecting Highly Variable Genes

While we could calculate the reduced dimensions using all of the genes that we have assayed, in practice most of the genes will have very little variation in expression, so doing so will not provide much additional signal.
Reducing the number of genes we include will also speed up some of the calculations.

To identify the most variable genes, we will use functions from the `scran` package. 

> The first, `modelGeneVar()` attempts to divide the variation we observe for each gene into a biological and technical component, with the intuition that genes with lower mean expression tend to have lower variance for purely technical reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first function, `modelGeneVar()`, attempts to divide the variation observed for each gene into a biological and technical component, with the intuition that genes with lower mean expression tend to have lower variance for purely technical reasons.
```

> We then use the output from that with the `getTopHVGs()` function to identify the genes with the highest _biological_ variation, which is  what we are most interested in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We then provide the `modelGeneVar()` output to the `getTopHVGs()` function to identify the genes with the highest _biological_ variation, which is what we are most interested in.
```

```{r select HVGs}
# identify 2000 genes 
num_genes <- 2000

# model variance, partitioning into biological and technical variation
gene_variance <- scran::modelGeneVar(normalized_sce)

# get the most variable genes

> hv_genes <- scran::getTopHVGs(gene_variance,

Reviewer: print? or `head(hv_genes)` to show it's a vector?

                              n = num_genes)
```

### Principal components analysis

> Now that we have selected the genes we would like to use for the reduced-dimension representations of the expression data, we can start to calculate them 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have selected the genes we would like to use for the reduced-dimension representations of the expression data, we can start to calculate them.
```

First we will use the `scater::runPCA()` function to calculate the principal components from the expression matrix. 

> This representation is fast and fairly robust, but may not always provide the best graphical representation, in part because we will usually want to keep a fairly large number of components. 

Reviewer: are you missing a "not" here? "we want to keep a lot of components so it's a bad representation" feels opposite to me

Author: I'm trying to say that by keeping lots of components, the result is still too multidimensional to plot, since we can only look at two at a time.

> The default number of components is 50, which we will stick with, but enter it manually just for the record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default number of components is 50, which we will stick with, but let's enter it manually just for the record.
```

```{r runPCA}
# calculate and save PCA results
normalized_sce <- scater::runPCA(normalized_sce,
                                 ncomponents = 50,
                                 # use only the variable genes we chose
                                 subset_row = hv_genes)
```

> These reduced dimension results will be stored in a `reducedDim` slot in the SCE object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These reduced-dimension results will be stored in a `reducedDim` slot in the SCE object.
```

aha, slot! ;)

Author: Yeah, a slot this time... because it is a list(ish), but I don't want to talk about it...

```

### UMAP

Finally, we will calculate a UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection) representation of our data. 
This is a machine-learning-based method that is useful for performing dimensionality reductions suitable for visualization, but it is very important not to overinterpret the results it produces.
In particular, while you will often see some apparent clustering of cells in the resulting output, those clusters may not be particularly valid, and the spacing within or between clusters may not reflect true distances. 

In many ways this is analogous to the problem of projecting a map of the earth onto a flat surface; any choice will result in some distortions. 
However, with UMAP, we rarely know exactly what choices were made and what distortions might have resulted. 

Since the UMAP procedure would be slow to calculate with the full data, so the `runUMAP()` function first calculates a PCA matrix and then uses _that_ to calculate the UMAP. 
Since we already have a PCA matrix, we will tell the function use that instead of recalculating it.

```{r runUMAP}
normalized_sce <- scater::runUMAP(normalized_sce,
                                  dimred = "PCA")
```

> As before, we could extract the UMAP matrix from our SCE object with the `reducedDim()` function 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As before, we could extract the UMAP matrix from our SCE object with the `reducedDim()` function.
```

Here we will use a graph-based clustering method, which starts by identifying cells that are close together in the multidimensional space.
It then identifies "communities" of highly connected cells, and breaks them apart by regions of lower connection. 

There are a number of algorithms that can perform this clustering, each with parameters that can affect how many clusters are identified and which cells belong to each cluster. 
It is also worth noting that these clusters may or may not correspond to "cell types" by whatever definition you might prefer to use.
Interpretation of these clusters, or other measures of cell type, are something that will require more careful and likely more customized analysis.

We will perform our clustering using the `bluster` package, which can perform many different types of clustering.
As mentioned earlier, we are using "graph" clustering, which we define using the `NNGraphParam()` function.
Within that are a number of further options, such as the weighting used for building the network graph and the algorithm used for dividing the graph into clusters.

Modifying these parameters can result in quite different cluster assignments!

> For the clustering below we will use Jaccard weighting and Louvain clustering, which correspond more closely to the default methods used by `Seurat`.

Reviewer: more closely than what? You might just get rid of "more"?

```{r clustering}
nn_clusters <- bluster::clusterRows(
  pca_matrix, 
  bluster::NNGraphParam(
    # number of neighbors to use in network graph
    k = 20, 
    # weighting scheme for building the network graph
    # default is "rank"
    type = "jaccard",
    # cluster detection algorithm
    # default is "walktrap"
    cluster.fun = "louvain"
  )
)
```

We can save the cluster assignments back into the `colData` of the SCE object with a little shortcut: the `$` followed by the name of the new column we want to add.

```{r add clusters to SCE}

> normalized_sce$nn_cluster <- nn_clusters

Reviewer: sneaky sneaky!

We should expect to see two fit lines: 

- One line will correspond the the "healthy" cells and should show little to no relationship between the number of unique genes detected and the mitochondrial percentage.
- By contrast, the line that corresponds to "compromised" cells will show a negative relationship between the number of unique genes detected and the mitochondrial percentage.

This plot will also show, for each cell, the posterior probability that the cell is derived from the compromised distribution; a higher score indicates that a cell is more likely to be compromised.

It is also critical to note that this model can _and does_ fail at times. 
Plotting the results as we have done here is not a step to skip. 
**Always look at your data!**

```{r miQC plotModel}
miQC::plotModel(filtered_sce, miqc_model) + theme_bw()
```

We can now filter our data based on the probability compromised as calculated from the model.
But before we do that, we might want to quickly plot to see what would be filtered out with a given cutoff.
The default is to exclude cells that have a posterior probability of 0.75 or greater of being compromised.

```{r miQC plotFiltering}

> miQC::plotFiltering(filtered_sce, miqc_model, posterior_cutoff = 0.75)

Reviewer: I might rephrase and/or add phrasing like - "even though 0.75 is the default let's write it to be explicit." Not critical.

```

In this case, the line between kept and removed cells seems to correspond to a mitochondrial percentage of about 12.5%, but note that this will not always be constant: the cutoff point can vary for different numbers of unique genes.

At this point, we can perform the actual filtering using the `filterCells()` function, giving us a further filtered SCE object.

```{r miQC filtercells}
qcfiltered_sce <- miQC::filterCells(filtered_sce, model = miqc_model)
```

### One more filter: unique genes

While the miQC filtering is pretty good, you may have noticed that it still left some cells that had very low numbers of unique genes. 
While these cells may not be compromised, the information from them is also not likely to be useful, so we will filter those as well. 

> For now, we will use a cutoff of 200 unique genes as a minimum. 

Reviewer: "For now" implies we're circling back to this. Are we?
